Enhanced project workflow and GitOps deployment strategy (#500)
mia-platform/documentation: docs/development_suite/deploy/gitops-based/index.md

---
id: gitops-based
title: GitOps deployment strategy
sidebar_label: GitOps deployment strategy
---

:::caution
This is a **BETA** feature and, as such, is currently under active development. Pay attention using it.
:::

**GitOps** is a modern approach to managing and automating the deployment of applications and infrastructure in a software development lifecycle. 

> By enabling the new **Enhanced Project Workflow** <!-- TODO: LINK -->on a Console project, it is possible to adopt a GitOps deployment strategy instead of the classic pipeline-based one.

Reviewer: I'd add the info about the Enhanced workflow requirement in the above caution banner as well

## Introduction to GitOps

GitOps deployment is based on the principle of using Git repositories as the single source of truth for both application code and deployment configurations.

> Popular tools that support the GitOps deployment strategy include ArgoCD, Flux, Jenkins X, and more. Such tools operate by comparing the desired state of your project, as defined in the project’s Git repository, with the actual state of your Runtime resources. If there is a discrepancy, the tool automatically takes corrective actions to bring the cluster's state in line with the desired state.

Reviewer: shall we put some links to the tools?

> Popular tools that support the GitOps deployment strategy include ArgoCD, Flux, Jenkins X, and more. Such tools operate by comparing the desired state of your project, as defined in the project’s Git repository, with the actual state of your Runtime resources. If there is a discrepancy, the tool automatically takes corrective actions to bring the cluster's state in line with the desired state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Popular tools that support the GitOps deployment strategy include ArgoCD, Flux, Jenkins X, and more. Such tools operate by comparing the desired state of your project, as defined in the project’s Git repository, with the actual state of your Runtime resources. If there is a discrepancy, the tool may automatically take corrective actions to bring the cluster's state in line with the desired state.
```

taking action depends on the tool configuration; e.g. ArgoCD detects changes from git and applies them but if you manually change something on the cluster it's no guaranteed that argo would update the configuration, it depends on how you have configured the specific configuration.

For this reason I'd use *may automatically*

**This way, it is guaranteed that the project configurations saved on the Git repository are always consistent with the project’s Runtime configurations.**

Adopting the GitOps approach facilitates the automated deployment and management of applications on Kubernetes clusters, making the deployment process more reliable, reproducible, and efficient.

> ## Advantages of pull-based deployment

Reviewer: this is the first time "pull-based deployment" appear, are we going to call it this way? shall we always refer to it as GitOps

Author: It is actually mentioned in the enhanced workflow page, where this page is linked

With pull-based deployment, you only need to update the Git repository to trigger changes. This **lowers the complexity of the deployment process**, since the cluster automatically aligns itself with the repository, reducing the need for explicit deployment commands. It also facilitates the process of rolling back to a previous version, which comes down to simply reverting the changes in the Git repository.

Another benefit is that **the cluster does not need to be accessed directly**, reducing its exposure to potential threats. In traditional deployment methods, pipelines often need direct access to the cluster to make changes. This introduces security risks, as any breach or unauthorized access to the pipeline could potentially compromise the entire cluster. In contrast, GitOps relies on the Git repository as the single source of truth. Authorized users make changes in the repository, and the GitOps tool, like ArgoCD, autonomously synchronizes the cluster with the desired state.

> Moreover, in push-based deployment models, pipelines often require access to credentials to authenticate with the cluster and make changes. Storing credentials within pipelines increases the risk of inadvertent exposure or misuse. In GitOps, **credentials are typically managed outside of the pipeline**, and are not directly exposed to the pipeline code.

Author: Yes this sentence means that for example you have them securely stored in a secret manager. We might say it more explicitly

> Moreover, in push-based deployment models, pipelines often require access to credentials to authenticate with the cluster and make changes. Storing credentials within pipelines increases the risk of inadvertent exposure or misuse. In GitOps, **credentials are typically managed outside of the pipeline**, and are not directly exposed to the pipeline code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, in push-based deployment models, pipelines often require access to credentials to authenticate with the cluster and make changes. Storing credentials within pipelines increases the risk of inadvertent exposure or misuse. In GitOps, **credentials are typically configured within the GitOps tool** which often resides on the cluster itself and has specific authorization rules and that are not directly exposed to the pipeline code.
```

**This way, it is guaranteed that the project configurations saved on the Git repository are always consistent with the project’s Runtime configurations.**

Adopting the GitOps approach facilitates the automated deployment and management of applications on Kubernetes clusters, making the deployment process more reliable, reproducible, and efficient.

## Advantages of pull-based deployment

The GitOps deployment strategy is often associated with a **pull-based approach**. In pull-based deployments, the cluster's state is automatically synchronized with the desired state stored in the Git repository.  
In fact, once the configurations are pushed to the Git repository, the deployment to the cluster will be handled automatically. This ensures that the deployed application is consistent with the latest version of the source code and configurations.

> This approach stands in opposition to the [pipeline-based strategy](/development_suite/deploy/pipeline-based/index.md), in which a pipeline provider must be set up to trigger the deployment and apply the Kubernetes configurations (using tools like `kubectl` or [`mlp`](https://github.com/mia-platform/mlp).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach stands in opposition to the [pipeline-based strategy](/development_suite/deploy/pipeline-based/index.md), in which a pipeline provider must be set up to trigger the deployment and apply the Kubernetes configurations (using tools like `kubectl` or [`mlp`](https://github.com/mia-platform/mlp)).
```
